es, yes.
 That's called the "freeing of the anima from the negative mother archetype," in Jungian psychology. It's precisely that. That negative feminine will be overlaid on your partner, unless you're able to clarify it, and clarify your relationship with it. That could be something like overprotection, like in your past—or it could be neglect, for that matter. Or it could be the rejection at the hands of many, many women, before you encounter this woman. You're going to bring that bitterness forward, as a kind of projection.
 If we are unwilling to undertake this kind of excavation, then we are doomed to continually have relationships that are cutaneous. The superficial coordinates will govern our experience of relationships.
 Yes. That's the repetition compulsion, from the Freudian perspective. That isn't how Freud explained it; that's how a Jungian would explain it. But the simple explanation of it is, well, if you bring the same set of unexamined presuppositions to every situation, the same fate will play out. You might say, "well, all those women are the same." It's like, "well, actually, no. But the part of them you're able to make contact with acts the same every time." That's a very different thing.
 Brilliant. This is where six and seven, the next Steps, chronologically occur. Six, having done this inventory, you recognize what patterns have been at play in your life—which "defects of character have governed you" often pride, wanting to control other people's perspective, self-pity, self-centredness, intolerance, impatience, greed, jealously, envy, lust, sloth.
 That's where you identify the seven deadly sins, and how they play out in your life, essentially.
 Yes. Step 6 is about becoming willing to live differently—saying, "are you actually willing to let go of lust? or do you like lust? do you like being impatient? does it serve you, in some way, to be slothful?"
 It's highly probable that it does. It's easy; it's gratifying; it's powerful; it's pleasurable—especially in the short term. There are reasons that people are tempted by the seven deadly sins.
 They're kind of glorious—they're dark glory and beauty.
 Oh, absolutely. That's exactly right. There's a dark romanticism, and you really see that in the death of celebrities around 27. They fall in love with the allure of that romantic death, and it does them in.
 So the anti-libido; the dark libido; the death force. So once you have diagnosed which particular defects of character have been most prominent in your path, and become willing to let go of them, Step 7 is making a concerted and real effort to live without them.
 That's a sacrifice there, eh? That's, "what are you willing to sacrifice, in order to move forward?" You have to give up something that you love, and you may have to give up the thing that you love best. That's the fundamental sacrificial motif.
 Sacrifice is an unattractive idea in our society, that's based on consuming and indulgence. This is again, perhaps, where you and I somewhat differ. Whilst this will not change about the individual's engagement—a kind of Step 1 acknowledgement that there needs to be change—this is where I say there needs to be a social responsibility. For whatever reason, our society's become a manifestation of these darker impulses. These are the prevalent forces, at least in the kind of society I live in.
 Too much emphasis on immediate gratification.
 Too much emphasis, because immediate gratification is a tool of consumerism. This would be my argument. But at this point in the program, the spiritual becomes—I find, personally—undeniable. You have to call to something else. You have to, in a sense, lay yourself open. The idea of prayer becomes quite important.
 So there's a Jungian idea, there. The Jungian Self is the thing that guides the ego through transformations. Imagine the ego, which is what you think you are—well, the thing about the ego is that the ego can be wrong, and the ego can die and be reborn. What that indicates is that there's something underneath the ego that can guide that process of transformation.
 Yes, yes.
 Partly what you're calling on, when you call on this higher power, is—at least from the psychological perspective—a decision to rely on that thing that can guide you through transformation.
 Yes, because surely—as we said, in relation to another—we are likely relating to a set of coordinates that we impose on the female. The same would be true of the self we have created an egoic impression; we have constructed an artificial self. But beneath it there is a higher Self, or an ulterior Self.
 That's right. It's often composed of things that you refuse to or weren't willing to develop. So when Jung talks about, for example, the incorporation of the shadow—you've constructed an ego, and there's things it can do and can't do, that it's allowed to do and isn't allowed to do. Then there's a shadow domain that consists of the things you could do, but haven't. Some of that's terrible, but some of it's what you need to break free.
 Is there an infinite variety in the shadow, or is there sort of templates, there? Is there, would you say, a common component?
 Aggression and lust are the two, because they're the two that are most difficult to integrate into the ego. Aggression destroys, and, of course, lust subsumes the individual to sexual desire.
 Lust is identified as a very powerful self; it can subsume; so I suppose that's why a lot of theological doctrines focus on the control of lust.
 Well, it's a disruptive force. For example, if you make a medium- to long-term relationship with someone, and you negotiate that, that provides you with a stable structure that can operate across your entire life. It's good for you; it's good for them; it's good for your kids; it's good for society. But then, if you're really attracted to someone momentarily, you can be driven to act on that. All the rest of that can burn up. So it's no wonder that it's viewed as a force of tremendous disruption. Now, it's also a force of tremendous life, right? You want to be attracted to people; you want to have that vital libido as part of what's driving you forward. But hopefully it's on your side, and not working against you. If you're successful, and you put yourself together, and you're disciplined, you should still be maximally sexually attracted. But it should be under your control. You're not the puppet of that force, anymore. It's integrated into you, and that's a much better way to manage it.
 In your understanding, how is the shadow incorporated? What rituals, what ceremonies, what behaviours successfully incorporate the shadow, say, using the example of lust? What's a way back in for the lust that has been disembodied or repressed? What's the safe way back in? Is there one?
 Well, I think part of it is to admit to your desires within your own relationship. You might say, "well, I'm tired of my wife." It's like, "well, yeah. Maybe—maybe you're tired of the games that you're intelligent enough to play with your wife. But she's as pluripotent as you are." You have to admit to your desires, let's say, and maybe you have to make them consciously manifest within your own relationship.
 Hmm.
 People do that by dressing up, or by playing sexually, I would say.
 Yeah, play.
 Play is a transformative element.
 Yes.
 It might be that you're uncomfortable with the idea of your wife as sexual plaything, because you think that a woman that's married should be proper and prim, and should only behave sexually in a certain way, in which case—well, that becomes stale and dull, and you're more likely to be tempted by something on the outside.
 To me, that's a very obvious example of how habitualized thinking is prohibitive, even without reaching the extremes of self-destructive, addictive tendencies. If I have a habit of regarding my wife as Object A—even if that's not objectification as we typically take it, but limiting beliefs about my wife—the tools that break down addictive thought patterns could be used to create new terrains, new liberty, new play. So once you've done up to Step 7—you're right, it's a sacrifice of the old self, and a handing over to some kind of sublime, divine Self. Step 8, you make a list of people you have harmed and become willing to make amends to them. So you look back and go, "oh, God—I shouldn't have stolen that; I shouldn't have done that; I treated that person badly; that was wrong; I lied." So it's moral; it becomes quite a moral process.
 That's a real repentance and atonement. Atonement is "at-one-ment." If you're carrying transgressions that you regard as transgressions now, in your life, you don't want to carry those forward. You want to step forward in life without that moral burden, because you'll have contempt for yourself, otherwise, and you won't take care for yourself.
 Also, in a sense, what you're talking about is allowing lust back in—incorporating lust. This is a broader method for incorporating annexed aspects of the Self. Like, "how can I fully love myself, if I know I treated that person abominably?" Well, if I go back, and say "that was wrong; I did you wrong; I owe you an amends," you invite that part of your life in.
 That's right.
 You amend your path through life, as well as teaching yourself that is not the way we proceed anymore. That's Step 8.
 That's real action in the world. It's not a hypothetical, at the point. It's kind of like telling people what you've written down about your faults, because it makes it real when you're acting it out with someone else. It's not only a mental thing, at that point.
 Step 8 is, "write up the list of people." Step 9 is, "now go do it." It makes the distinction, I think, to create a space for you where you're not continually thinking, "I'm not fucking doing that; I'm not going to apologize; I was abused by them; fuck that—they did as much wrong as I did."
 Right, which is not the point.
 It's not the point.
 They might have done more wrong than you did, but you're still stuck with the fact that you still did something wrong, and that's not good.
 That's right, and if you refuse to surmount the obstacle of some arbitrary measure of who is more wrong, then you continue to cast yourself in victimhood.
 That's exactly right.
 You have no personal autonomy.
 It doesn't matter if you're only 5 per cent at fault, and it also doesn't matter if the other person apologizes to you. They should; it would be better for them; it might make things lay out. That's not the point.
 This, perhaps, is where what I think is significant—now that your life has become not a negotiation between you and other beings as materially present themselves, but between yourself and a higher purpose that has been declared earlier, you are now operating on a spiritual plane. You are no longer about, "if I do that, I get that." It precisely doesn't matter if the other person goes, "I don't care if you apologize or not. Fuck off."
 In religious language, that would be expressed as the discovery of your Father in Heaven, instead of your earthly father. Your Father in Heaven would be the higher spiritual authority to which you owe allegiance. You can think about that either in religious terms or in nonreligious terms—what you've done is you've, in some sense, abstracted the idea of a higher authority and a higher purpose, and you've decided to devote yourself to that. That's a religious act.
 That's precisely antithetical to postmodernism "there is an essence; there is a code; there is a way; there is a truth."
 That's right. That's what is precisely antithetical. The postmodern claim is that there are multiple ways of looking at the world. That's true, but the antithesis of that is, "yes, but just because there are multiple ways of looking at the world doesn't mean that there are multiple proper ways of looking at the world."
 Yes.
 In fact, there's a very narrow range of proper ways of looking at the world.
 My concern with atheism has always been its sort of easy affiliation with nihilism "oh, why don't we just wander over there and start fucking people, then?" That's where my mind immediately goes. If there is not an order, why not smash everything to smithereens? You're saying, ideological, that is what's happening. Ideologically, we are deconstructing God; we're deconstructing morality; we're deconstructing gender.
 That was the danger that both Nietzsche and Dostoevsky pointed to, clearly. You dispense with the transcendent principle, and you open up the landscape for impulsive nihilism.
 They responded to post-enlightenment rationalism. Is that what Dostoevsky and Nietzsche were responding to?
 They were responding to, essentially, the idea of the death of God. Both of them, and explicitly.
 Is that an enlightenment idea? Where is the death of God happening prior to Nietzsche?
 At the hands of a kind of arrogant and narrow rationalism and materialism.
 Exponentially, that has led us where we're going now, which is a kind of digging the earth from beneath our feet, putting ourselves into the abyss.
 That's right. That's the hypothesis, precisely.
 The last three Steps. Step 10 is, like, "continue to make inventory. Let this process continue." For me, in psychoanalytic terms, it's like when there's a moment—I know any spike in my energy if I go, "oh, I felt something. That was interesting. I felt jealous, there. I felt small, in that moment."
 Exactly.
 These are the moments I know. "How was I participating in that? What belief of mine was being challenged? Is that a helpful belief?" "Belief" being a thought that I like having.
 Right. That's a kind of consciousness "well, I'm going to fall apart. I'm going to make mistakes. I don't want to make mistakes. I'm going to keep an eye out for when I do make mistakes, and I'm going to make them conscious. And then I'm going to try to work on them."
 Yes—"bringing them into consciousness." My number one fear on a personal level, and possibly on a social level—I don't quite know how to extrapolate or conflate those two notions—is unconsciousness. I get very afraid when I'm dealing with unconscious individuals—when people don't know why they're doing what they're doing. You might see this in violent rage, or in less dramatic or theatrical behaviour.
 Yeah. There's a great idea that lurks at the bottom of the Christian mythological tradition a little bit of consciousness destroyed the original paradise. We became conscious enough to be aware of our own mortality. The cure for that is way more consciousness, not a return to unconsciousness.
 Yes. There's no going back. I sometimes think the plethora of zombie movies is, you know, "they don't know they're already dead!"
 That danger of the zombie is the danger of the desire for unconsciousness, as a solution to life's problems.
 I think, again, this something we are being invited to participate in, through consumerism to live your life continually on the frequency of unconscious energy, such as desire and fear. We're not being invited to participate on the level of conscious interaction, presence, in the moment.
 Well, you could make that case if you made the case that consumerism promotes the gratification of immediate desires, above all else.
 I think it does. That's what I'm pushing for. With this original sin, a little bit of consciousness is a dangerous thing. We become aware of our vulnerability and mortality, our nakedness, our corporeal nature. But the solution to this is…
 To become more conscious.
 How is that? Is that the whole rest of the Bible?
 Yes, I would say so.
 So I'm wondering, when does that get resolved? Not when they get kicked out of the garden; not when Cain slays Abel.
 Well, part of what happens in the redemptive story is, if you think about Christ as a symbolic figure—symbolic of the process of transformation that we just described—one of the morals of the Christian passion is that you need to radically accept your limitations. Part of this "keeping your sins before your eyes," which you just described "here's all the ways I fall short of the glory of God," let's say. "I make this mistake, I make this mistake, I make this mistake." That's all consciousness, and it's painful. You think, "well, you become more conscious of this glorious process of enlightenment," and, overall, it is. But the things that you need to become conscious of are precisely the things that you least want to become conscious of.
This is the motif that Jung identified in the Alchemical tradition. The Alchemical motto, so to speak, was, "that which you most need to find will be found where you least want to look." Right. And everyone knows that's true. You tell someone that, and they go, "oh, yeah. I know that's true." It's also the greatest barrier to enlightenment, because if enlightenment is all tulips and sunshine, then everyone would be enlightened. But it's not. It's this continual bringing before yourself all your proclivity for transgression—obviously, because how are you going to solve your problems, if you're not aware of them?
 People don't want the old discipline, do they, Jordan?
 Well, it's not surprising. But the alternative is far worse. That's the thing. I was very curious—like I said, I talked about this with Tammy, when we were coming here. I thought, "Russell decided to live when he was 27. I would like to know why." So why did you? Why did you make the decision to not allow what was consuming you to kill you?
 In a sense, it was taken out of my hands. For the first time, I encountered positive male authority figures. They were able to address that, in particular. I was sent to a treatment center. I had three months. I had time to think. I passed from childhood directly into addictive behaviours. In fact, those addictive behaviours were already present in childhood, in less toxic forms. In retrospect, my relationship with chocolate was addictive. My relationship with pornography, as an adolescent, was addictive. I was using it for medical purposes. So when substances became an option, in adolescence, it was seamless. That meant that my emotional growth was arrested, at that point. The reason I was able to stop was because I was offered help. I was given help by people at the management company that I was working with. They said, "you're a serious drug addict. You should go away."
 OK, so partly that meant that they regarded you as the sort of valuable commodity that was worth preserving.
 Yes, there was a degree of that.
 That's helpful. Even if it's purely an economic interest, there's something to that. And so then you went into treatment, and you found some people.
 Curiously, the place that I went was run by an atheist, Chip Somers. But the 12-Step principles—you can't unpick it from the Christian Oxford Group. For me, it is more appealing when you talk about it in Jungian terms, although I have no problem with the sublime and the divine. I live for that shit. I was always trying to get out of my head, off my face. Those were the things I wanted a sublime experience; an experience of what is beyond the material. That is what I wanna know. But once I was in that environment, and given drugs to help with my addiction to opiates… During that time, I suppose, in a way, I didn't fully address the issue of addiction, because I was really promiscuous for about a decade. That behaviour was transplanted, kind of effortlessly. But I do remember a kind of moment of epiphany—if "epiphany" is revelation of previously concealed truth—when it first occurred to me "I suppose you don't have to do drugs every day." I remember that thought entering, and it being like, "oh, yeah. I never thought about that," because I'd found a solution. It worked for managing pain—for preventing further mental investigation or discovery of conclusions that would have been unhelpful, and that I wouldn't have been able to deal with.
I think, in a lot of cases—and I'm sure there's many, many variables—that, actually, chemical dependency is a successful technique for preventing suicide "this is a holding pattern to stop me from doing something more dramatic." Unless people have access to an ideology, a structure, and support that will help them through that, it's very difficult to overcome. I was fortunate, in that I was granted that—and then granted this system. As I've been working it, I've come to the conclusion that it is possibly universal, because I think it is derived from universal ideas. That's why I think Jung identified something like, "if there's a spiritual experience, and there's a community, that's how someone could be stopped from drinking alcohol continually." Then they took the original 12-Step Fellowship, took the Oxford Group, that had a program of sort of redemption and restitution. It seems—initially, I think, in a materialistic society—counterintuitive to think the solution to addiction is going to be spiritual awakening. But that's what it is. The final steps are "stay connected." You're continually inventorying, for the moment. So you're thinking, "uh-oh—I felt something, there." You want to be in the moment, connected. I have to notice if someone makes me feel inferior, or if I'm sexually attracted to someone. Those are some of the most obvious examples of something that will take me out of my connection. The final step is to help others and remain awake.
 Well, that's the end of the hero's journey once you go into the darkness and find something of value, the next thing to do is to bring it back and distribute it within the community.
 Jordan, it would be difficult for me to accept that you've not been sort of personally affected—angrily, rather than just objectively—because your personal trajectory—in the public eye, at least—began with the situation in Canada, with forced speech, or however it's termed now. Are you able to distinguish between your sense of personal irritation—because I think for most people—and tell me whether or not you think this is right—academia seems like an ancillary area. It doesn't seem mainstream, to most people. But to you, it seems very vital. But you are an academic.
 Well, OK. So there's two things, there. People regard academia as ancillary, but it's not. The reason it's not is because the universities train the people who run things. Whatever's mainstream in the universities right now, even though it's separate from society, is going to be mainstream, everywhere, five years down the road. That's a big problem.
 The vanguard, academia.
 Oh, definitely. There's no doubt about it.
 Do you think what's happening now, in terms of a media and politics, you could preemptively have diagnosed from what was happening five or 10 years ago?
 Oh, I think that, in some sense, I was preemptively diagnosing it. I've been watching the politically correct postmodern types for quite a long time. I noticed two things about five or six years ago that I really didn't like. The first is that, because I'm a personality psychologist—as a researcher, not as a clinician—I know the literature on gender differences, in personality. It's part of my field. I could tell that I was starting to have some reluctance to deliver the lecture on gender differences. Now, I didn't stop, but felt that I was treading on thin ice, by delivering those lectures. I thought, "oh, that's not good," because I'm like a comedian I'm willing to say pretty much anything that I think is true, regardless of the consequences, in some sense, because I'd rather take the consequences of what's true. I thought, "this isn't good, because if someone like me—who's rather uncontrollably mouthy, let's say—is starting to have second thoughts about teaching what's a very serious topic, and something about which there's a very well-developed science, then how much are other people starting to censor?" At the same time, my students, many of whom are female, were telling me that they were really hesitant to talk about gender differences in any of the courses they were running. I thought, "oh, this is not good. This is seriously not good."
It's certainly the case that my colleagues censor themselves increasingly on campus, with regards to the topics they're willing to discuss. It's subtle, because—imagine, in a given lecture, I could discuss any of 10 things, and three of them are taboo. Well, I just won't discuss those. That's a kind of invisible censorship. It's not like I'll get up, and say, "look, I could have talked to you about gender differences in personality, but I won't, because I'm afraid." I'll just pick another topic, because there's lots of topics to choose from. That means there's going to be a bunch of topics that are really important—because, actually, the issue of sex differences and personality happens to be really important—that people just won't talk about.
The other thing that's so annoying about this is, especially with regards to sex differences in personality—well, let's say that you're firmly on the side of women, just for the sake of argument. Well, do you admit to or deny the existence of sex differences in personality? What's better for women? The radical leftists basically say, "oh, if you talk about sex differences, then you're part of the oppressive patriarchy, and you're attributing to women a different kind of temperament in the attempt to continue the suppression." But I could just as easily say, "wait a second—if you want to give the individual the greatest degree of freedom, you say, 'look, you're different from another person. You're different on the basis of a variety of your characteristics—sex being one of them. That's going to have some effect on what sort of choices you want to make in your life. Go ahead and make whatever choices you want, as far as they're a direct expression of your Being.'
No serious commentator in the psychological literature, in the personality domain, debates whether or not sex differences in personality exist, or that they have a biological component. What's also interesting about that is that none of those people are conservatives. There are no conservative psychological researchers, to speak of. They're in a tiny minority. So the people that have done the research indicating that there are differences between the sexes and personality, and that those differences have, in part, a biological component, are liberal and left-leaning people, who've drawn those conclusions despite what their ideological presuppositions might have suggested to them, to begin with. I don't know what to say about that, except that it's all appalling.
 I suppose the fear must be that difference will ultimately be used for leverage, for status.
 Sure, and that's a reasonable fear, because anything can be manipulated. But claims that people are identical, in some way, can also be used for the same reason. If I insist that everyone is exactly the same on all dimensions—there's just as much of a totalitarian threat lurking in there as there is in using differences as an excuse. And we're also not having a serious discussion about this. Yeah, men are overrepresented at the top of the economic apex. That's true. It's a small minority of men, by the way. It's certainly not men in general. But they're radically overrepresented at the bottom, and, believe me, man nobody cares about men who are failures. They are like off the bloody radar.
 Yeah.
 There's no sympathy for men who are failures. So men stack up at the top and the bottom. We don't have a discussion about that, and we don't have a discussion about the fact that women are radically underrepresented in dangerous jobs, although they are—or in trades that require brutal physical labour, or in jobs outside. So the complaint is always, "well, if you look at the top 1 per cent, there are more men than there should be, by pure sex division." It's like, "well, yeah. But if you look at the bottom, the reverse is true." If we're going to have the discussion—and I don't necessarily think we should have that discussion—we should look across the entire economic spectrum.—
 I wonder how much of this debate is being governed by unconscious forces. I wonder how much of what we're experiencing is a manifestation of where cartography has not yet been.
 I think a lot of it. Are you thinking about any particular part of it?
 I feel like the reason that I imagine that your arguments that are based on research are so successful is because people are expressing feelings as opposed to cogent and researched arguments. It feels like there is a powerful, dominant patriarchy, and no one can deny… I mean, there is power. There is such a thing as power, and there are people who benefit from structures being as they are.
 Of course.
 That's the point of those structures, being the way they are. One of the things I've observed is that, whenever change is discussed, my tendency has always been to be sympathetic towards movements that are about change or empowerment of what might be termed "disadvantaged groups." When you're curious about the resistance of change or the difficulties that you face when trying to bring about change, look at who would be negatively impacted, were that change to be brought about. Usually, that means that there's some people—conservatism makes sense for a particular group of people. One thing I felt when reading your book was that—because I think you're coming from a perspective of psychoanalysis—the language rings true, and the analysis rings true. But one of the questions I was keen to bring to you was, when you talk about skateboarders—I think it's in the last-but-one chapter—and that spirit of young people…
 Courage.
 Yeah, courage—and willingness to try dangerous things and push forward. I wonder how that sits with the idea of an earlier passage in the book, where you talk about the gratitude that we should feel for having time to read a book, and the ability to read a book, and sort of respect for the establishment and systems that have been set up, from which we all benefit. I could find it difficult to dispute your opinion about social justice warriors, and that kind of somewhat rootless, unresearched rage. I identify what you're saying, there people that can't keep their bedrooms tidy—be careful before you let them organize an economic system. But similarly, where is change going to come from? Who is going to challenge tyranny?
 Well, those are the sorts of twin forces that we have to contend with, across the political spectrum. I could run through something quickly—to put the things that you just brought up in perspective, let's say. If you're going to value some things more than others, then hierarchies are inevitable. And you have to value some things more than others, or you don't have anything.
 Beauty or strength, or something.
 Sure, whatever it happens to be. The ability to play the flute. It doesn't matter what it is.
 High on my list.
 Obviously, if you value music, then you're going to value some musicians more than others, because some are better. So you have to value things in order to move forward in life, and you have to value things in order to have something valuable to produce. But if you play out the value in a social landscape, you're going to produce a hierarchy. The problem with producing a hierarchy is that a small number of people are going to be more successful than the majority, and a very large number of people aren't going to be successful at all, at that particular thing. It's inevitable. So you say, "well, we have to put up with that, because we need to pursue things of value."
OK, fine. That's the right-wing perspective, that the hierarchies are justifiable and necessary. Now, the left-wing perspective is, "yeah, but wait a minute the problem with hierarchies is that people stack up at the bottom, and that they tilt towards tyranny across time." That's also true, and so you need that dialectic in society, between the right wing, that says, "we need the hierarchies, and they're useful, and you should be grateful for them, and they structure you and give you form, and they provide value," and the left, that says, "yeah, but they exclude people, and people stack up at the bottom, and that's dangerous to the hierarchy itself, and it means that people might not have opportunity," and you have to say "yes" to that.
The situation we're in, right now, is one where the radical leftists—and this is mostly a problem that, for me, is the universities—say, "yeah, but all hierarchies are just tyrannical power." It's like, "oh, no, they're not. Hierarchies are based on competence, in a functioning society, and mostly our society functions. So you can't go that far." Now, that doesn't mean that hierarchies don't tilt towards self-interest and tyranny across time, but that's a bad thing. It's even a bad thing from the conservative perspective. So there's room for the left. There's room for the left, because the poor will always be with us. That's the reason that there's room for the left. The dispossessed need a voice, not least because there are talented people among the dispossessed, and if they're stuck at zero, everyone suffers, because we don't have access to their talents. It's a bad use of resources. But on the right it's, "no—we need the damn value hierarchies, and we need to be grateful for our traditions and our structures. They stop us degenerating into chaos."
 Also, across our society, numerous hierarchies emerge. At some point, decisions are being made "is being a brilliant flutist, or being brilliant at tennis, or being brilliant at owning land, or at controlling energy resources, or dominating financial systems—which are the hierarchies that are most important?" Also, the way that resources are designated, and challenging those hierarchies, seems to become, well, almost impossible. When I was leaving the hospital that had been taking care of my mother—at the level of crisis and trauma and tragedy there, they're excellent. They've got the best doctors. The guy that operated on her, Martin Griffiths, is a fantastic surgeon—it was in fact him that Trump quoted when he talked about European hospitals with blood-spatted floors from knife crime. It was a mangling of a quote that Martin Griffiths had given. And then I step outside; I'm driving a long way—Chapel Road—and there are electronic advertising boards that require energy to tell me to eat McDonalds or Kit Kats or whatever.
There's so much poverty on that street. There always has been, in that part of East London. Terrible poverty. There are moments where I helicopter out to the macro—a perspective that no individual can long hold, a weight that can't be long borne. But in that moment, I think, "why is this hospital struggling for resources, when we can afford to run electronic adverts for McDonalds? Who gets to decide how collectively and individually we determine where resources and where power—both in terms of energy and in terms of human power—end up? How are these decisions made?" As you say, among the dispossessed, there are great resources, great talent. One would imagine—if the research were possible—to the exact same degree as there is power and talent among the possessed, because it's normally an accident of birth that decrees. Reading about your early life in Canada, in a blue collar community, and the sort of mental health issues, and the anger and agitation that grows there—so much of that is about resources the dispossession of the native people of that area, the mental health issues of your friend, Chris. For me, we that are rising through these hierarchies, we that have experiences on both sides of that line, well, we are now challenging this evolutionary force. We are now in a position to talk about these hierarchies, how they're ordered and how they're organized, and whether there is room for negotiation.
 Well, it's up to us to do that.
 Don't you think there's a risk in conservatism, of saying, "well, this is how the cards have fallen?"
 Of course. That is the risk in conservatism.
 How do we confront that?
 Well, the risk is that the hierarchies ossify and turn to stone, and then there's no mobility. The idea that things can turn to stone, and they become tyrannical, is an extraordinarily old idea. For example, in the story of Exodus—the story of Moses—the Egyptians are portrayed in that story as tyrannical conservatives, essentially. They're masters of stone, and Moses is a master of water, and water is the thing that dissolves. That drama's being played out in these stories that are thousands of years old. In the ancient Egyptian story of Osiris and Horus, Osiris is the old king who becomes too rigid. What happens to him is that he's dismembered by evil. That's the consequence. So even the Egyptians, long ago, knew that the danger of hierarchies is that they become static, corrupt, and tyrannical.
Part of what we do in our ongoing political dialog—when it's genuine dialog—is to say, "look, we need these systems; they're not avoidable; but are they functioning properly? Are they loose enough, so that people can move? Are they serving the broader good, or have they degenerated into something that's too tyrannical?" You kind of pointed to both of those, in the way you formulated that question. You said, "look, my mom was in the hospital, and she needed care. I found a surgeon who was an excellent surgeon." So what you did there, basically, was take a bow to the functional hierarchy of the hospital, and said, "look, the greatest surgeon actually rose to the top, and thank God for that, because otherwise my mother would be dead."
That's a competency hierarchy, and it could be contaminated by tyranny, in which case it would be the brother of some powerful person who ended up with the surgical position, right? And then everyone dies. That does happen in many, many cultures, where nepotism or connections define your position on every axis. But then you said, "well, then I went out of the hospital, and I was driving down the road, and I saw what appeared to be a misallocation of resources." What we have to do about that is have a discussion about it, constantly. It's like, "are we allocating resources to the appropriate place?" The other lurking problem there is, "to what degree to decide about the allocation of resources by voluntary effort—by planning—and to what degree do we let the market take care of it?" That's also something that continually requires negotiation.
 Yeah, that market, mate—we can't trust that.
 Well, that's the question.
 We talk about it like it's a neutral thing, but it's just a conglomeration of interests of the powerful.
 Well, it's a bunch of things. It can be that, but it can also be the way that we collectively value things.
 Yeah, but look at our collective values—and I'll just quickly say this, first. I heard that, in Sweden, they regulate and control access to alcohol at a state level. Liquor stores are sort of socially run. They're not allowed to be advertised, in Sweden. Sweden, I guess, is one of those havens of—I don't know what your views are of Sweden, but I see a lot of stories that make Sweden seem like a postmodern democracy, almost, in some respects. Anyhow, I thought it was curious that they control alcohol in that manner. I envisaged the breweries and liquor distributors saying, "hey, that's not a free market! You're controlling access to alcohol!" as if, somehow, the free market was neutral. But there is no neutral if the market is what has the power, peoples' desires will be overly stimulated. If people have McDonalds advertised at them, or alcohol advertised at them, people will bloody eat McDonalds and drink alcohol. There has to be some moralizing force. There has to be something that's not economically led, that's not the manifestation of greed, that's in the conversation. Someone in a secular society, where there is no reasonable or trusted voice of God, has to be able to say, "don't drink too much alcohol or eat too much McDonalds," because they will.
 See, I think the most effective solution to that problem is to have the economic system run, let's say, by distributed individuals, who are themselves aiming at a higher good. So I think the most effective way of regulating the market, so to speak, is to improve the moral character of the people who make up the market, rather than directly regulating the market—not that the market doesn't necessarily need some regulation, because you might say, "how about we don't devote alcohol advertising to children under 10?" Most people would agree that's a reasonable perspective. So that is limitation on market forces. There are places where you can find that limitation being accepted by almost anyone. But part of what you're pointing to is that, if the only thing that's governing the market is concern for pure market success, then the market can produce all sorts of excesses. But I think what you want is to help orient people towards a transcendent good that's over and above market interest.
You might say, "well, what interests should you serve, as you're trying to make a living as a comedian?" You might want to make sure that you're conducting yourself appropriately in the market place. You're concerned about yourself, but also your future self—and that's partly why addiction is such a catastrophe, because it's great in the short term; it's not so good in the medium-to-long run. So you have to take care of yourself and your iterations through the future. You have to take care of yourself in a way that you're taking care of your family. You have to take care of yourself and your family in a way that you're benefiting the community, and that should be foremost in your mind. So then, when you start to make economic decisions, even in your business, you're not saying, "I'm going to do whatever I can to make as much money as I can." You're going to say, "I'm going to do whatever I can to make as much money as I can, while also making sure that I'm taking care of myself and my future self and my family and my community, and being grateful for all of that, and serving it properly." And then I think the market can work more effectively, but still might require some discussion around the edges, because nothing is simple. The reason that I'm concentrating on the individual and individual development is because I think that's the best way to do that regulation.
 I think that's important. I think it's nonnegotiable. I think it's necessary. But I also believe that, if you have a society that's predicated on some of the worst aspects of human behaviour—lust, desire, fear. If lust, fear, and desire are so high in the mix, if you're constantly being prompted towards onanism and consuming, I think that individual improvement will be insufficient. I feel that your success—I don't know what it's based on, but I feel, to a degree, that you've contacted people "oh, yeah—I can improve my own life; I can have a bit of personal authority and autonomy." I think that's hugely positive. But if every time you step out of your house, if every time you interface with society or pick up your phone or look at a screen, the aspect of yourself that's being nurtured, that's being invited to participate, are the lower aspects of your nature—because those are the most successful routes to a person's decision making impulses.
Now, I think it is difficult for these individual projects to succeed. I think that, for certain people, that message will take hold, but for others it won't. I'm not a big fan of regulation. I understand your irritation at this postmodern deconstructionalist argument of "let's destroy God; let's destroy all categories man, woman—none of it's real." I believe in essence, the humours, the deities, the gods. I feel these things are present. But I feel that we're already being subject to a kind of invisible tyranny. It's already happening, and I don't think it's happening as a result of like some critical theory, post-Marxist—that's not where power is. That feels like it's sort of bullshit, but it doesn't feel like it's as fucking powerful as Glaxo Kline or Halliburton. What I'm interested in is power, real power, and how power is functioning, and how power is negatively impacting ordinary people.
 I think it's perfectly reasonable to point out that there might be multiple ways that people experience tyrannical oppression. Every hierarchy's going to tilt towards tyrannical form in its own particular way. I've been concerned about what's happening in the university, on the radical left. Your concern—the concern you just brought up—is something like overwhelming, large-scale corporate dominance. I think that's also a reasonable set of concerns. It might not be for the best, for example, that all of our communication is filtered through Google. That might be a bit too much. The question is always, "what can we do about it?" There's an answer to that, actually "we can leave people's ability to communicate untrammelled"—so that's why I'm an advocate of free speech—"so that we can have intelligent discussions about those problems as they emerge, and hopefully work towards solutions." We can't just generate a structure of rules that says, "here's the 10 rules that are going to deal with that complex situation." Things change too rapidly for that. The reason that freedom of speech—as far as I'm concerned—is the paramount right, and also the paramount moral obligation, is because it's through our ability to exchange honest opinions that we participate in the process that enables us to keep tyranny of the sort that you described and the sort that I described at bay.
Part of the reason I've taken the tack that I have politically is because, well, my government had the gall to implement compelled speech legislation, without noticing what it was that they were interfering with. How do you keep tyranny at bay? The proper exchange of ideas between free individuals keeps tyranny at bay. That's the best we've got. It doesn't work perfectly, and it's also, I think, a gift that England, in large part, has given to the rest of the world—to formalize and codify that; put it into a body of law; erect governmental structures that are really predicated on that idea. It's a remarkable achievement, and it's something that we should be profoundly grateful for.
 Thank you. I want to talk to you about—I was taking that praise on behalf of England, there. As an English person, I accept that. There are two dragons, then—at least until we reach some non-dualistic utopia, where everything is one. There is the inner dragon of our own desires and fears, but I suppose, when we're talking about management of resources, where does the attention need to go? It's difficult. There's something about my background that has led me to identify as the dragon "oh, it's consumerism. It's turning people into consumers," because, obviously, as an addict, that's what I am a consumer—an ultra-consumer. And it seems with you, with your background in academia, this neo-Marxist—but when I sort of think about socialism, e.g. "people are working too hard; you should only work four hours a day; there should be time for fishing in the afternoon"—which is in Das Kapital. I think he talks about fishing in the afternoon.
For me, that seems like a very beautiful, fair, and just idea. Also, whilst I can imagine they are irritating on a campus—particularly for somebody who's researched such a lot—I don't see them as powerful. That's part of my intrigue. I suppose it's comparable to when I was talking to Sam Harris another person who I admire, but who I've got a "yeah, but I don't know…" Like when I'm talking to Sam Harris about Islam, I go, "but how is Islam going to…" I feel like, even if we're talking about Saudi Arabia and wahhabism—Saudi Arabia is an economic entity. They're not an Islamic entity, in terms of, "let's go do some Islam!" It's, "let's go do some business!"
 I'm concerned mostly with the emphasis on the collective identity, rather than the individual identity. The process that you just described, I would say—and this is the answer to the question that you posed at the beginning of our conservation "is there something universal about the process that you laid out?" I think there is, and I think it's at the core of individual development, and I think it's the most powerful of forces. And so I think that the individual should be regarded as the proper locus of evaluation. The problem I have with the postmodern neo-Marxist types—apart from the fact that their analysis tends to lead to a kind of nihilism—is that, because they're making the group the paramount level of analysis, this sort of thing gets ignored. What I'm trying to do in my work—we have a program called the Self Authoring Program, that kind of steps people through these 12 Steps that you've just described. The first thing that people do is write about their past—all the emotional experiences. The second thing they do is take an inventory of their personality faults and virtues, so they can rectify the faults and capitalize on the virtues. The third thing they do is chart a course for the future. It takes them into account, and others.
I see it as a reflection of this universal process that you just described. I think it's the most powerful form of transformation. But more importantly, I think it's the one that risks doing the least harm. It hasn't hurt anybody, that you've put yourself together. It's just good, right? It's good for you; it's good for the people that know you; and it's the right level of humility. You took what you knew to be wrong in your experience; you took personal responsibility for it; you made changes for yourself; you didn't go around pointing the finger at what was wrong with the external world and trying to fix it. It could easily be that, once you have your act together—or maybe even before—you should be doing some things to adjust political or sociological systems. But the problem with that is, "what makes you think you can trust yourself?" It's like, "well, I'm compassionate." "Maybe—maybe you're also envious of the successful." The probability of that's pretty damn high, by the way. So you better know, before you express that compassion—especially in the political domain—whether that is contaminated by things about yourself that you haven't contended with.
 Do you think an honest declaration along those lines—or specifically that—in the political field would be refreshing?
 This is a very funny thing. The emperor of ancient Mesopotamia—so this is some of the earliest political documentation we have, by the way. Here's what they used to do to the emperor Every New Year's Day, they would take him outside the wall of the city—so he was responsible for everything within the walls. Outside was chaos and the unknown. They'd take him outside the city; they'd strip him of all his emperor garb, so he's no longer emperor; they'd make him kneel. If I remember correctly, the priest would hit him with a glove, and say, "name all the ways that you didn't embody Marduk in the last year." Marduk was the God of the Mesopotamians and the thing that took on the great dragon of chaos. And so it was the responsibility of the emperor to kneel down, and say, "here's all the ways that I haven't been acting out my proper self, and that brought the kingdom into disarray." And then he would be forgiven, and they would act out the reconstruction of the cosmos. That was the New Year's celebration. And then he'd go in and try to be a good king.
 I like that.
 Yeah! No kidding. Absolutely. It's like the confession of the emperor "here's the way I haven't been good."
 Are there any comparable—are the powerful held up for that kind of evaluation in any form now?
 We don't have rituals for that.
 Because we don't acknowledge the emergence of order from chaos. We don't acknowledge divine principles. And I think this is possibly because of an assumed meritocracy. People that are in positions of power are there for a reason. You don't need to start stripping them naked, taking them outside the city, and saying, "how often did you wank in the Oval Office? every day? Get out."
 I think there might be something to that; and that's the danger of pride that goes along with ascension and hierarchy "well, because I'm here in this position, I must deserve it." It's like, "yeah, but there should still be something that you're bowing down to, and that might be the abstract idea of sovereign authority itself." If you think about it only psychologically, that's a figure that, essentially, has a touch of divinity about it.
 The monarchy right now, that's the Queen the anointed and appointed monarch. I suppose, in a postsecular nation, she becomes the emblem of Britain, rather than the emblem of God on earth.
 Right. Well, I think it actually functions, to some degree.
 In the same way.